[Music]
all righty folks let's go ahead and
begin so welcome to the healthy gamer
webinar day - all right so let's get
started so my name is dr. Alok Canoga
welcome to the healthy gamer webinar day
- so we decided to do this webinar
because we you know I know I know a
bunch of people are kind of stuck at
home with kovat and so we thought it
would be a good opportunity to offer a
different kind of content and what we're
hoping to do is offer more comprehensive
teaching about various concepts so
welcome today - I'm excited I'm glad
that you know all of you guys are here
just a little bit about the structure of
the webinar so we're going to start with
10 minutes of yoga and based on
yesterday's feedback thank you very much
everyone who filled it out we are I'm
going to start by actually demonstrating
one round and we're gonna go slower and
we're gonna do three rounds today so
actually yoga may take a little bit
longer than 10 minutes
the second thing so the topic for the
day so we do yoga for about 10 minutes
then we cover a topic for somewhere
between 30 and 50 minutes and the topic
today is going to be anxiety so I'm
gonna explain kind of my take on anxiety
and really not so much we're gonna go
into some detail but I think a big part
of the reason that I'd like to talk
about anxiety today is to teach some
basic principles about how the mind
works and as we better understand like
what are the rules of the mind then I
think our ability to control ourselves
sort of improves over time and so we're
gonna talk a little bit about anxiety
today and then we'll have time for Q&A
and I think another piece of feedback
about last week's are sorry yesterday's
webinar was that people felt like that
QA was a little bit disorganized I
completely agree and so they're hoping
for a little bit more structure and
maybe even
a little bit more time for QA so I'm not
quite sure exactly how we're gonna
manage that but we're gonna do our best
so we'll have a little bit more time for
QA and then we'll end with about ten
minutes of meditation so we're gonna
start with yoga so I encourage everyone
to get up and do yoga with me so the
purpose of doing the webinar at the same
time every day and starting it with
yoga's so that you guys can start out
with yoga I think it's a great way to
start your day it's a great way to yeah
it's a great way to start your day it's
a great way to sort of physically get up
and moving a little bit and we can talk
a little bit more about that so let me
just this there we go okay so let's do
it so a reminder that I'm gonna
demonstrate one round of Surya Namaskar
all right so Surya Namaskar is the Sun
script phrase that means Sun Salutation
so this is a set of yoga practice
practices that's designed to do first
thing morning and it kind of prepares
your body in your mind for the day so
the first step of Surya Namaskar is I'm
gonna I'm gonna stand with my feet close
together a kind of a detention and then
arms kind of relaxed in in namaste
position and then the first step is arms
up so biceps are going to be near the
ears so I'm gonna try to give you guys a
couple of like physical landmarks that
if you try to do the posture is going to
be a little bit easier to achieve and
then second one is step down and or go
down and touch your toes and remember
the goal here is not
your toes we don't want to bend her
knees it's really to just bend your back
and let gravity do the work for you so
go ahead and lean down you guys can just
watch this round right third round I'm
going to put my hands the palms of my
hands right next to my feet so they're
forming kind of a little bit of a lines
of surety that's the sway that sort of
makes sense
and then what I'm going to do is put one
leg back and so once again and put and
leg back here and then what you can
really notice about this pose you can
look up where you're supposed to look up
is that you can kind of like lean into
it and you'll feel like a different
structure you can kind of come back out
lean into it
come back out and this knee should kind
of be right next to your shoulder so
I'll kind of demonstrate maybe on this
side okay and then this leg back and now
we're going to kind of be in push-up
position so you want to be kind of
straight and then down and for this
position you want toes knees chest so
your butt is slightly elevated and then
for them and then we push up so hips
going to the ground the back is bent
shoulders are not like this shoulders
are rolled out elbows are bent that's
completely fine as you get better you'll
be able to push up more but we can stay
low it's not a big deal look up and I
want you guys to notice when you do yoga
even as you move a subtle part of your
body like your neck you'll notice
different things in other parts of your
body and then we go to part of a passing
or Mountain Pose once again ears by the
biceps
put your heels into the ground other leg
forward look up again and then back to
head down you'll notice that even
between the first round and the second
round
your flexibility is going to be far more
increased and that's the purpose of yoga
let me go up again just and then back to
the center okay so let's now you guys do
it with me we're gonna do three rounds
we're gonna go slow maybe the CEO is
gonna take a little bit longer actually
it's okay so start start with your feet
apart close your eyes go ahead and just
feel your body for a moment and now put
your feet together feel the instability
open your eyes and then close them again
you can use this just slight opening and
closing of the eyes like open for a few
seconds feel the stability to return
close your eyes feel the instability so
even that can kind of anchor you in the
present it's gonna be important skill
we'll talk about later
now must a position deep breath in and
out and now begin so raise your arms up
slowly biceps two ears go ahead and
stretch your arms up a little bit good
feel that expansion in your back and now
the next step will be to going to touch
our toes or bend down and touch your
toes so go ahead and do that
let gravity do the work for you let
yourself hang let your head hang hold
that for about 10 seconds
just hang you don't have to be very low
you can do this you can do this whatever
your back feels like doesn't matter
and now palms by your feet right leg
back and look up just hold that for a
second try to get into the position
breathe notice as your body sends you
signals it's gonna be talking to you
guys and then put your other leg back
push-up position look up if you feel
tired that's okay if your muscles are
quickie that's okay you can put your
knees down toes down chest it down for a
minute and we're gonna go ahead and just
hang out here for a second okay palms
touching the ground toes touching the
ground chest touching the ground
forehead touching the ground peel the
back of your neck feel your lower back
big deep breaths and now what we're
going to do is hips into the ground back
starting to bend up shoulders nice and
out elbows bent and look up
notice the constricted breathing and now
go ahead and make a triangle with your
body ears to the biceps and try to put
your feet into the ground so put your
heels down try to stay and kind of keep
your feet flat on the ground and as you
do that you'll notice a lot of stretch
in your calves that's the purpose okay
now what we're gonna do is put our other
leg forward so right leg forward between
the hands come up and then look up and
now I want you guys to really try to get
into it like move your hips towards the
floor I let your let your leg know you
can be up like this with your back
curved sort of like a turtle or you can
straighten your back out and as you
straighten your back out notice what
happens to your hips notice what happens
to your legs notice what happens to your
thighs so kind of get into the position
then look up and now bring the other
foot forward come up a little bit and
lean into it
as you exhale go ahead and go a little
bit further notice what happens when
you're when you exhale your stretch
increases feel that stretch in your body
let it anchor you in the present we're
in the here and now not thinking about
anything but this now up let your hands
come palms come together
go ahead and feel feel sort of the
relaxation of this pose and then come
back the must-have position feet
together let yourself breathe and notice
your body catching up with breath and
also notice that even though you're
catching up on your breath your breath
is slower there's less of it your
breaths are going to be deeper very
naturally your respiratory rate will be
decreased you'll notice maybe even
pauses between your breaths just not
usually how we breathing right usually
it's in out in out your breath is like
hey man we'll find you we don't we don't
need oxygen right now we're good
and now we're gonna do one more round
okay we'll try to do two just depends on
time thank you did you whatever lets did
you so let's begin again so arms up
notice the big breath easy to breathe
expansion of chest biceps by your ears
and now down let yourself hang let your
head hang especially
now we're going to suck it up we're
gonna do palms by our sides let me by
our feet and left leg back this time you
look up curve your back or make it
straight you don't want it curb you
don't want Turtleback as best as you can
look up and then let your hips kind of
roll into it you definitely don't want
to rock I mean that's not good in yoga
both can be nice to feel and then other
leg back push-up position keep your back
straight kind of look towards the floor
and now knees so you're gonna have
you're gonna feel your toes right so
feel your toes on the ground and then
put your knees down if you're tired
that's fine too and then you still have
kind of a straight back and then roll
forward just and for them and and notice
that as you put your chest and forehead
to the floor your butt is naturally
going to go up and your neck is
naturally going to stretch and feel that
stretch in your neck you guys can just
chill here for a second if you want
and now push up bhujangasana that's this
good thing for the pose so hips into the
ground now shoulders rolled out not like
this this is what you guys may want to
do you're gonna push up you can use your
arms to push up right but don't do that
shoulders out it's gonna weaken the
strength of your arms and you're in the
ability to push up your body and you're
gonna turn you're gonna come down a
little bit which is perfectly fine you
do not want your arms to push your back
past where it wants to go
so stay like this it's going to be
physically way more taxing which is
perfectly fine if you guys need to rest
you can actually go back to this but
we're gonna go to blue janessa elbows
bent shoulders out back bent hips to the
ground look up and then part about
awesome
Mountain Pose so we're gonna use a
couple of our anchors here like ears -
biceps once again heels into the ground
flattening of the feet which is going to
create stretch in the calf let it happen
feel the blood flow into your brain
and now right leg forward now look up
straight in the back move your hips into
it and feel the freeness of your breath
and now we're gonna come up foot forward
hands hanging down head hanging down
and now palms together go back to
standing straight and tall
feel the relaxation let your hands come
down whoo and now notice this position
so I want you guys to understand that
this starting position with no mosfet
position with your hands in front of you
doesn't feel like much when you start
the practice but just notice how you
feel at the end of the practice right
this is how this position was developed
it wasn't to start the practice it's
actually to end the practice and your
body is like man that was good but I'm
glad we're not doing it anymore
notice kind of a tingling sensations in
the energy that's the sensation of
Brahma Brahma has life energy or Chi
your body is waking up now we're going
to do our 3rd round ok do this one a
little bit faster so take a deep breath
in out and arms up here so your biceps
stretch stretch your back reach your
arms up keep your feet flat on the
ground but otherwise to leech out for
each other now down and hanging arms
hanging go ahead and move into it let
gravity do the work for you no further
than you feel like going palms by your
feet right foot back
look up and now other foot back push-up
position and then come down toes knees
chest and boredom
and then hips into the ground push up
bend your back look up shoulders roll
out elbows bent
good
and then I think this is downward-facing
dog
heels to the ground here's the elbows
and now right leg forward look up
breathe and now come up head hangs body
hangs feel how close we are to our toes
you could do it you could touch them so
easy arms up and then come back down and
then let yourself breathe so now I'm
going to teach you guys another awesome
it's called shavasana or corpse pose so
then what I want you to do with your
eyes closed go ahead and kneel down okay
and then I want you guys to lay it down
on your left side and then I want you to
lay down on your back with your arms and
palms face up let your feet hang out go
to your sides let them just relax and
just lay
and just feel the ground underneath you
you can put your attention on your
breath
okay
since we've got a lot to do today we're
gonna go ahead and sit back up moving
whatever way feels comfortable go ahead
and work out any kinks that are left sit
up
let's go ahead and come on back okay so
[Music]
alright so that took thirty minutes
okay so I've got a question for you guys
okay let's do a poll so we're gonna do a
poll what do you guys want to talk about
today yoga or anxiety I can we can just
talk about yoga actually if you guys
want oh all right so let me know what do
you so we can just talk about what yoga
is or we can go back to anxiety and how
yoga works oh man I love this okay so it
sounds like we're sticking with anxiety
[Music]
No
within like five seconds I saw a huge
spike for your anxiety so we'll do that
that's okay we'll stick with anxiety
okay it's all the same anyway okay thank
you guys very much I found that very
helpful okay so
[Music]
Oh interesting
okay so someone suggested that I use a
different note taking app which I'm
happy to but I just realized that I
can't screaming capture on this app or I
don't know how to so we're actually
going to go back to just regular notes
okay oh okay all right so let's talk
about anxiety oh my god my OCD is
killing me okay so when let's go ahead
and screen share so thank you guys very
much and let's go ahead and go back to
this channel your inner boomer okay so
then what we're gonna do is this so
let's talk about anxiety you guys see in
this okay let me just make sure so
question number one what is anxiety
right let's start with basics no no
interesting looks like I can't cap cast
maybe it's because it's it's using
reflector okay so what is anxiety so the
first thing is like let's just think a
little bit about what our experience of
anxiety is so when I'm anxious about
something I'm worrying right so we use
this word worry and so what is worried
worried is thinking of consequences
right we're usually worried about stuff
we're worried about what are people
gonna think of me
what are what's gonna happen at work
today what is my boyfriend or girlfriend
gonna think what are how do I look or
people gonna think I'm stupid so there
are all kinds of thoughts but they're
basically thinking about consequences
usually of your actions like if I go to
you know if I go out with friends and I
open my mouth is everyone to think I'm
dumb if I answer a question and I get it
wrong in class as everyone gonna think
I'm done and so that's really what we're
he is so thinking about consequences and
so the next question is if we look at
consequences this is gonna sound like a
weird question when do consequences
happen and the answer is in the future
so the first thing to understand about
anxiety is anxiety is our minds ability
to predict problems in the future okay
so so if we think about this so like
let's say here's our mind right here's
our brain whatever it's a bad looking
brain five head so we'll give this
person dr. K's artwork okay so this is
who we are and this is your anxious mind
right because the anxious mind is kind
of like always you know it's gigantic it
feels heavy and then since we're anxious
we're gonna give you a frowny face all
right that's a mustache and then that's
your face okay all right so this is our
brain right and what we're gonna so if
we think about it like our brain is kind
of thinking about the future right what
if
[Music]
what if what so this is anxiety does
that make sense
so fundamentally our my this is our our
minds ability to like look into the
future so what that means is that you
know if we think about it like how does
anxiety work it is essentially Minds
predictive capability so anxiety is
actually a normal function of the mind
which is our predictive you know kind of
like danger like it's predictive and
like danger oriented like that's what
our mind has this capability that sort
of looks into the future and then let's
[Music]
so our mind has this capability to look
into the future and predict problems and
if we didn't have this capability like
we wouldn't be alive so this is an
evolutionary capability so evolution
helps us predict problems okay and so
when our problem predicting capability
gets out of our control
this is anxiety so I want you guys to
think about this for a second okay so we
have our head I'm just gonna make a
circle and then it has all these
functions right so danger prediction
kind of reflecting on the past fantasy
right when that to is sort of future
oriented has things like imagination
these are all the functions of the mind
like they're more but these are kind of
what we'll talk about so the interesting
thing is that when these so generally
speaking what we want to do is we want
to be in control of these functions of
our mind so you know I want to think
about okay if I'm going to you know
let's say Co bid the Kournikova
quarantine is like going on in many
places so we want our mind to be able to
look
to the future and anticipate problems
right so anticipate problems and this is
vital because like unless we know how to
prepare for the future like we're gonna
get screwed so our mind kind of like I
say okay so kovat is going on what do I
need to do like how do I prepare so
that's like a very healthy part of our
mind the what anxiety is is when this
function of our mind actually like we
lose control of it so we don't get to
decide when it operates
that's what anxiety is so anxiety is
problem anticipation out of control
right and if you think about it that's
what really it really is like if I'm
gonna if I have social anxiety I'm gonna
create all these kinds of potential
problems from my social interaction I
you know if I'm worried about my health
then I'm like I have a pain in my chest
and then my mind automatically goes to
all these different thoughts about oh
maybe I have a heart attack maybe I
cancer maybe have this maybe I have that
and it's like problem anticipation but
just blown out of proportion
so this kind of comes back to and I'm
not gonna I'm gonna just steer away from
my earlier drawing so this is the mind
so anxiety is future-focused
okay so now what does this mean so like
let's just think about this like can you
have anxiety about the past or is all
anxiety focused in the future can you
have any anxiety in the present and some
people will say oh you can't have
anxiety in the past like I'm I'm super
anxious and I think about last night
like I woke up this morning and I'm
feeling super anxious because last night
I went out with some friends and then I
made a joke and then like six people
laughed but then it was sort of like
directed at the seventh person because
this is how anxiety we're excited it's
super complicated and then you kind of
notice that that seventh person laughed
maybe they were offended so isn't that
thinking in the past the answer is
actually no because what is anxiety
really doing it's thinking about a path
event and it's thinking about the
consequences in the future right even
when you think about anxiety like if you
have anxiety about past events if you
really pause and study yourself well but
you're really worried about is the
future impact of your actions in the
past
so anxiety is always anxiety is always
future focused so this is like piece of
homework number one right I encourage
you to examine this point so between now
and tomorrow I don't want you to think
about every single anxious thought or
like whenever you have an anxious
thought you can remember it look at
yourself and try to figure out okay am i
worried about something in the present
the past or the future and see if this
this is my assertion you guys tell me if
that's true or if that's false
okay so anxiety is essentially our
future like problem predicting
capability so can it exist in the past
or can it exist in the present second
thing that I want to note is that since
anxiety is essentially a normal function
[Music]
gone wild what is that you know what are
some of the implications of that so the
first is that the higher the IQ the
worse the anxiety so just think about
this for a second okay so if you have a
function that predicts problems the
greater your analytical capability the
stronger your analytical capability the
greater chance there is that it's going
to be able to predict more problems and
what this means is that if people try to
fight against your anxiety and by people
we're including your
self the smarter you are the stronger it
is so when you try so a lot of times the
response is reassurance and what do I
mean by that people tell you you say oh
everyone thinks I'm a dumbass and then
someone comes to you and says oh no man
like we all like you we think you're a
fantastic person and the smarter you are
like the stronger you are at knocking
that away right you say no no dude like
you really don't understand and they can
make all these different arguments to
try to convince you that you don't have
anything to worry about that people like
you and then your anxiety is like that
I'm pretty sure I'm right about this
because this is what I want you guys to
understand is that this is actually a
normal function of your mind so if your
mind is strong if you're high level then
you know your your stats are gonna be
high and like if anxiety takes control
of you then like its stats are gonna be
high I want you guys to think kind of
think about you know in games like their
mind control mechanics right and like
you want to mind control the strongest
enemy you can because then you're gonna
get the strongest ally and anxiety is
sort of like mind controlling your it's
could taking control of your problem
anticipation your ability to predict
problems and it's kind of like using it
against you so the first thing to
understand is that anxiety is not
necessarily an illness I mean I think it
certainly is an illness but it's not an
illness in the way that an infection
like Kove it isn't illness right it's
not something that happens to you it's
actually a part of you that is
malfunctioning it's not external so next
thing to kind of think a little bit
about is that most things in our brain
are learned and I want you guys to
appreciate for a second that anxiety is
usually learned okay and what I mean by
that is that you know if you're worried
about social anxiety there's usually a
reason you're worried about that as
opposed to health care anxiety or other
kinds of things so if we think about
when does the mind when does the
predictive capability of the mind
activate it is to protect us from
problems so depending on what's Happ
- in the past your anxiety will manifest
in different ways okay so this is why
people are anxious about different
things so the more that you talk to
people with anxiety the more you
discover that like their anxiety traces
back to like particular events and
that's to learn behavior because if you
think about you know if I'm worried
about getting burned by a stove why am I
worried about getting burned by a stove
it's because I've been burned by a stove
before and the more recent the injury
the more likely I am to be worried about
it you know if you are dating someone
who breaks up with you and then two
months later wants to get back together
your anxiety is going to be like what if
they break up with me again like that
comes from some some injury that you've
you've experienced and that's the way
that our brain works our brain anytime
we suffer or we we take damage of some
kind our brain tries to learn from it
and protect us and the way that our
brain tries to protect us is through
anxiety right so it predicts problems so
this is kind of interesting because if
we kind of like look at this this is not
necessarily I mean sure it causes us
suffering and we'll kind of get to that
for a second in a second but I want you
guys to first realize that your anxiety
is a part of your mind
that is actually like you know it's not
something you need to get rid of it's
something that you need to tame it's
kind of like a horse that's gone out of
control and is like bucking around and
you need to calm it down and help it do
what it's supposed to do which is
activate when you want to activate okay
so let's just think a little bit about
what anxiety looks like
[Music]
what does anxiety look like okay so
anxiety usually manifests as thoughts
about the future and then anxiety also
has a focus on the self so what does
that mean so if you think about like if
you if you write down and I encourage
you guys to do this so task number two
is write down ten anxious thoughts and
we're actually gonna switch gears for a
second so this is what I want you guys
to do his anxiety something you can
really switch on and off we're gonna see
right ah I'm very good
so we're gonna get to the physical
sensations in a second so I want you
guys can someone just post an example of
a like in chat some way just give me an
example of an anxious thought can I get
an example I don't know how much of a
lag there is no one likes me Oh perfect
what if I can't get a girlfriend
beautiful okay what if I can't get a
girlfriend okay okay okay will I be good
enough that's good guys thank you very
much will I be good enough to pass the
test right so I want you guys to notice
a couple of things the first is this you
can't have anxiety without I or me
actually I mean you can you can be
anxious about other people but generally
speaking a lot of the anxiety that we
experience is focused on the self the
second thing is that like what is the
tense I mean yeah what is it like what
is the direction of these thoughts right
so like will what if so these are future
oriented and these are focused on the
self right you guys see that and this
stuff can change this stuff is actually
kind of irrelevant this is the important
thing so if we're talking about how
anxiety works like what is the nature of
anxiety like how does it function in
your mind if we're opening up the hood
this is the consistent part because this
can be like completely random right will
I dot dot dot what if da da da and this
stuff this stuff has to do with like you
know specifically what your anxieties
about and I want you guys to write down
ten anxious thoughts and and
see like what about this pattern applies
and what doesn't so throughout your day
if you have an anxious thought just make
a note of it and write it out and I want
you guys to understand that you can't
say something like some people
so some people's like are using words
right so they're saying getting replaced
getting replaced is not an anxious
thought so you guys have to capture the
full thought right so so NOAA says
getting replaced so what I want you guys
to think about that's not actually the
thought that you have in your head so
train yourself because what that really
thought is the real thought is what if I
get replaced that's the full thought and
part of this process of understanding
and overcoming anxiety is to be clear
and descriptive about what is going on
in your mind
so as you can you know try to really
capture the fullness of the thought okay
so the next thing to think about anxiety
so the first thing is with their
thoughts right so there's their thoughts
of anxiety and then they're also
feelings see dr. K learned something
there are also feelings so the feelings
are like pain in your chest
[Music]
nausea butterflies headache sweaty palms
shortness of breath
right here are examples of physical
sensations that come with anxiety so the
first thing to understand is that
anxiety has cognitive and physical
manifestations so these are
fundamentally different right and you
guys have to understand that like like
notice both of these things and
sometimes you have an
thought without the sensations and
sometimes you have the sensations
without a thought so we're gonna get to
how to deal with each of these because
the the pathway is a little bit
different okay so now what do we do with
this so there are thoughts in there
there are physical sensations so the
other thing that I so now what we're
going to talk about is like what is your
mind how do these thoughts that we have
how does anxiety affect our mind so I
know this is kind of a weird kind of
question right like like we don't really
think about we think like oh I'm anxious
and that's sort of like I want to stop
being a anxious but let's try to figure
out like that's not actually that's not
sufficient if we really want to
understand anxiety we have to think a
little bit about what is the implication
or what is happening in our mind when I
have an anxious thought so how does it
affect our mind so the first thing is
that anxious thoughts are circular okay
so I want you guys to just think about
that so anxious thoughts lead to more
thoughts which lead to more thoughts
which lead to more thoughts and then we
kind of end up where we started guys
agree so this is called rumination and
this is actually a hijacking of
something called like our
problem-solving thought process right so
problem thinking solution and then so
let's say anxiety relaxation
right and then actually decrease in
thought so I want you guys to look at
these two things okay so this is
problem-solving let me try to fix this
okay and then move that up back over
here okay so let's just think about that
right
this is rumination and this is anxiety
and this is problem-solving so do you
guys see the difference between the do
you get any kind of the difference
between like these two processes
so this one is productive and both of
them start from the same place like they
start with anxiety right like you're
worried about something but one is a
productive problem-solving process and
the other is kind of like a self fueling
process so we can think about
problem-solving is thinking through
things right you start at point a and
you go to point Z and then anxious
thinking is you start at point a and
then you end up at point a so you never
get anywhere so what this means is that
that if we think about this like anxiety
is exhausting because it doesn't stop
and problem-solving is relaxing because
you kind of like think through things
and then you feel good about yourself so
anxiety sort of exhausts when we think
about how does anxiety affect the mind
the first thing that it does is it's
circular and it ends up exhausting the
mind and so if we think about how do
people cope
[Music]
so what are the coping mechanisms for
anxiety right so it's stuff that what
what is the main coping mechanism of the
anxiety is to shut off thoughts or mind
so good examples of this are sleep
gaming drugs right there there are
things that essentially try to shut off
our thoughts because this is this is not
getting anywhere right it's not like
it's not doing anything for us so it's
circular and so the only general e
speaking the solution that we have to
anxiety is to shut it off or you know
turn off the mind or shut off our
thoughts the problem is that what
happens so if we do this what happens
when the mind turns back on right this
is the real problem so let's say you
start playing video games like you're
worried oh am I going to fail out of
class am I prepared for the test that
that feeling is exhausting you guys are
thinking about that for a while and then
you're like oh I can't take this anymore
I'm exhausted I don't feel good you
start to play a video game and then it's
relief it's sweet sweet relief and then
after you play the video game then you
know if you turn off the video game like
what happens the anxious feelings come
back you're just back to square one
you're right back here because you're
not actually solving any problems okay
so the second thing to understand is
that so if we think about this this so
this process if we think about
problem-solving leads to a decrease in
thought anxiety leads to an increase in
thought so this is what I want you guys
to kind of think a little bit about okay
so what happens when we increase thought
versus the
Chris thought so this is our mind and
there are some things that we do that
sort of increase our thoughts and some
things that we do that decrease our
thoughts okay so what this essentially
means is that when we feed the mind we
increase thoughts and we when we
essentially starve the mind we decrease
thoughts and what do I mean by this like
it's kind of like you know when you when
you have an anxious thought that anxious
thought starts to breed right it's like
oh my god this person doesn't like me
and then this is gonna happen and then
this is gonna happen and then this is
gonna happen so what that looks like is
anxious thought right so let's say
anxious thought number one and then okay
and then that leads to number two which
leads to number three and then one
thought leads to another leads to
another right so what we're doing is
we're actually creating more and more
thoughts the other thing that happens is
like sometimes when people have anxiety
they try to argue so this is mechanism
number two so you try to tell yourself
against the thoughts and this can be
yourself or other people okay and so as
you argue against the thoughts what
happens the thoughts just grow it leads
to thought number four number five and
number six right so do you guys see how
they're trying to argue against the
thoughts if we look at the mechanism of
mind we see that arguing against your
thoughts actually does not work and in
fact makes your anxiety
worse right this is the same problem
it's all the same thing
so then the question becomes what do we
do about that right so like if if this
is if we assume that thoughts kind of
breed other thoughts or we assume that
conflict within the mind so the other
way to describe this is tension actually
that's not this but that's so this
process here is tension so this creates
tension in the mind right when you try
to argue against yourself you get
yourself riled up and the more tension
you create the more active the mind
becomes so if we think about this you
know how do we how does the mind how can
I say come up with the right word for
this what makes the mind grow right so
we're talking about feeding so tension
makes the mind grow number one right so
this can also include I'm gonna these
are essentially synonyms but conflict
what else makes that mind girl
excitement things like fantasy so I want
you guys to think about a daydream right
a daydream is one thought leading to
another thought leading to another
thought leading to another thought and
the mind locks this and so if we think
about the the a active mind an act of
mind is not really relaxed when you
think about like fantasy your mind isn't
relaxed right it's like super excited
and it's like active super super active
when your intention when you're in
conflict when you're in worry your mind
is not relaxed and what is a relaxed
mind mean I I pause it to you guys that
a relaxed mind has fewer thoughts
so if you think about like when is your
mind relaxed okay so when does this
happen so the first thing is that if we
do this right if we find a solution that
leads to relaxation then you don't have
to worry about anymore
the amount of thoughts once you come up
with a good solution and buy a good
solution I don't mean a fictional or
fantasy solution I mean an actual
solution that calms you down leads to a
decrease in thought so when does this
happen solution number two sunset number
three shavasan okay that's that last
pose that we did after the yoga like how
active was your mind number four
meditation number five
eating a cookie with full awareness
[Music]
right so let me ask you guys something
what time frame are these things focused
on where are you
are you in the past the present or the
future cookie cleanse absolutely present
right so I want you guys to think about
this if just think about this for a
second okay if if anxiety is literally
like the definition of anxiety is to
have thoughts in the future can anxiety
exist if your mind is in the present
we're thinking about cognitive anxiety
okay literally can anxiety exist if
we're focused in the present does shower
thoughts count as a relaxed mind
absolutely Ezri can't I add gaming to
the list absolutely absolutely
[Music]
so I want you guys to think about this
right so now we're gonna talk let's talk
about gaming this is sounds crazy
so when or games fun and when are games
less fun so when you're fully engaged so
I started playing this game called deep
rock galactic which I think isn't
amazing so like yesterday there's this
thing where you have a timer and like a
timer counts down you have to like get
on a ship before the timer runs out and
like we were playing this game and like
yesterday the timer was ticking down and
we had like six seconds left and we
weren't sure if we were gonna make it
and in that moment my mind was thinking
about nothing except this moment and it
was like I started cheering it was 11:30
at night I started cheering after we
made it because one of us made it and so
the mission was successful and my wife
was like you're being really loud so
there are times when gaming makes us
live is crazy Scott sounds in the
present and I want you all to understand
this if gaming did not do this this
would not work right so if we think
about sleep drugs gaming they're able to
bring us to something like the present
when is gaming less fun when we're
thinking
about the future in the game if I'm
playing a game of League of Legends or
dota and I have someone who's feeding
why is that not fun it's because I'm
thinking about the next five minutes I'm
not thinking about now I'm thinking
about oh god they're their ADC or their
carries getting fed we're gonna lose or
my so-and-so is a [ __ ] we're gonna
lose we're gonna lose we're gonna lose
we're gonna lose I'm going to have to
sit let's look at it I'm going to have
to sit in this game for 30 minutes okay
guys let's look for where is where are
the important words give you guys a
little hint let's go back and examine
our anxiety words wait where did it go
[Music]
here we go right so what are the
important words future-oriented in self
do we see those here future-oriented
itself to this crap doesn't matter
doesn't matter doesn't matter this is
this is unhappiness of the mind so in
gaming it's actually a beautiful example
because actually if you think about you
know if you think about like meeting the
deadlines and Deepak galactic if you
don't think you're going to make it
then that is actually anxiety provoking
but there are times there are times when
you're playing a video game where your
mind is fully focused in the present
you're not actually worried about making
it you're trying to make it so I want
you guys to notice this difference
worrying about winning and trying to win
what's the difference here where are we
with this one what's the time where are
we when we're worrying about winning
what do you guys think so let's do
another poll oh sorry cancel what time
frame are you in when you are worrying
about winning asked present hey you guys
tell me right beautiful so let's do
another one
okay oh looks like I can't do another
one yet oh I can't how do I show poll
results okay so it's like 95 percent to
4 percent when where is the time frame
of your mind
when you are trying to win asked present
you guys can't see the bowl interesting
we have to learn how to do that or
display results at the end of poll I see
okay
got it fixed fixed saved see look at
that just think about that for a second
when you're trying to win a game it's a
lot of fun
when you're worried about losing it
sucks even when you know that that when
you know you've won how fun is that game
that's the next question right so let's
ask that one so
okay so now we're gonna do one more okay
what's more fun trying to win a game or
knowing that you've basically one time
to win knowing you won let's see this
one okay
see if there's difficult
some amount what do you guys think is
more fun now interesting huh now I think
the interesting thing about knowing
you've won is that a lot of times our
games have certain outcomes that we want
right like we're grinding towards
something and even if you're grinding
towards something that grinding can be
somewhat present focus which is like
it's kind of weird and you really have
to look at that
because in that moment you know the the
grind is like what you're doing and
that's why you want to win because you
want the outcome but even in that moment
you're kind of present within the frame
of Briony which is complicated but right
so there is a little bit there's a
little bit more um grinding is in the
present right grinding ing so now let's
try to kind of wrap things up and see
what we've learned okay so we haven't
really gotten a chance to talk about
physical anxiety that's the first thing
but hopefully I've convinced you guys
that anxiety first of all so let's go
through conclusion okay
number one anxiety is a normal part of
the mind gone actually let's just go
with this
I like this gone wild okay number one
number two anxiety has two components a
cognitive component and a physical
component okay
so we haven't really talked much about
physical anxiety today which is okay
we'll get to that number three is that
anxiety is future-focused
and all oftentimes has rumination or
unproductive thinking and grows with
attention okay so now my question to you
guys is what do we do about this right
so for let's think about the structure
[Music]
Wow my handwriting's man okay dr. K is
gonna take a handwriting course
structure of the anxious thought which
is I me write plus future plus specific
content based on your past experience so
I want you guys to notice this for a
second a lot of times when psychiatrists
or therapists try to help someone with
their anxiety what they actually focus
on is this right Oh tell me about why
you're worried about social anxiety just
think about this for a second we have
social anxieties a different diagnosis
from let's say a phobia yeah or a
different kind of anxiety health anxiety
social anxiety western medicine focuses
on different kinds of content in class
suffice these anxieties differently
right you guys see that this is where
western psychiatry or Western medicine
is focused what I want you guys to focus
on what the Yogi's focus on is these two
they focus on these because the cool
thing is that you can fix someone's
social anxiety and then they'll still
have health anxiety or they'll still
have impostor syndrome or any number of
other things a phobia the phobias are a
little bit different to be honest but
that's actually not a good example so
the nature of a phobia and the content
of a phobia is actually different for
anxiety No okay so impostor syndrome so
like even if we check this off the list
that we still have to do these right
this is what Western medicine does so
now I'm going to ask you guys what is
the solution to this how do we fix this
one bring mind to present okay second is
don't feed the mind so what that means
is don't argue don't even go for
reassurance no argument no reassurance
[Music]
because our mind rebelled against that
right so we want to avoid these and
we'll talk a little bit practically
about how to do that in the future the
second thing so I want you guys to see
this for a second so one is to bring
that in mind to the present so if you do
something like yoga or you do some
centering activity like this is how
meditation helps anxiety because
meditation brings your mind to the
present that's what meditation is and
therefore you can't be anxious number
two this is the next thing is to get rid
decrease the ego
this is the real answer to anxiety I
want you guys to think about this so
this is the self right so do you guys
get anxious about things that are like
like how much of your anxiety has to do
with you if you can remove you from the
equation then how much how powerful is
your anxiety I'll give you guys an
example so let's say that I go to class
and I'm ice I start to say something and
then I'm afraid that these people are
gonna think that I'm an idiot
and let's say that you're in a room of
random strangers who you're never gonna
see again are you less likely to speak
with the strangers are more likely to
speak with the strangers right so if you
can remove your sense of self from the
equation if you don't have to worry
about your ego and what people are gonna
think about you then your anxiety goes
down right okay so let's think about
this um let me okay if you guys want to
pull it that's fine let's pull it let's
do this okay are you more worried about
[Music]
looking stupid in front people you're
going to see again or people who you
will never see again
[Music]
I pull it
let's see no gotta hit another button
excellent question to poll see so this
gets tricky we can explore it further
right so like like like or do you feel
more comfortable when you're so here's
the other way to put it like so to think
about the ego is do you feel more
comfortable when you're anonymous right
why do people with social anxiety
function better on the internet and
behind computer screens and away from
other people it's because they can
protect that they can isolate their ego
or sense of self this is why anonymity
[Music]
this is why anonymity is protective so
the other thing that you can do is you
can so one ways anonymity is a way to
like cover the self but the other thing
that you can do is you can sort of start
to dissolve the ego right and in the way
that you dissolve the ego this is when
we talk about meditation we're gonna
have to have we're gonna have a whole
day on ego or more than one day you can
do a whole semester on ego if you want
to but basically like I want you guys to
think about someone who's confident is
someone who is less likely to be
influenced by the opinion of others and
so they actually their ego goes down and
as their ego goes down they're less
anxious because the opinions of other
people's don't kind of matter to them so
in terms of what to do about it this is
the first thing that I want you guys to
focus on is if you can bring your mind
to the present literally anxiety cannot
exist physical anxiety is different I'm
talking about cognitive anxiety so if
your mind is in the present you cannot
be anxious that is like a fact and I
encourage you guys so in my opinion it's
not a fact it's my opinion and I
encourage you guys to test that and see
for yourself whether you can be anxious
while you are in the present and if you
are in the present because we think
about this way right so remember that
being in the present is this is what we
kind of call
all this stuff is relaxing you guys see
that anything that is present is going
to be relaxing and can you be anxious
while you're relaxed it's kind of like
an oxymoron so I encourage you guys to
examine this and let's even think about
eating a cookie like so if I eat a
cookie and I can just sit and enjoy the
cookie then it's fine if I eat a cookie
and I'm worried about gaining weight and
that this is gonna make me look fat then
it's not fun
take whatever example you want to look a
sauce salmon yourself see what you
discover we're gonna do questions okay
so let's start with I don't know how to
specify people but we're gonna actually
start with questions about how what's
your question let's do so okay so
Raymond we're gonna start with you buddy
let's see if this works I've clicked a
checkbox okay so one of the pieces of
feedback that we got is that we want one
question at a time all right Raymond
talk to me buddy hello
okay all right I'm gonna fit
Felipe Rico and one teen you guys up for
questions cuz I don't hear Raymond ah
[Music]
okay oh I see so I see that there's a
button for audio got it hello hey
Raymond
oh I can't hear Raymond I can't hear you
buddy
Raymond you have to turn the microphone
button on on the top somebody's speaking
it's not you all right all right who's
speaking do you have a man yeah hello
hey food babe oh yeah hi so when we were
talking before sorry I have stuff
written down you talked about the first
two parts about that sorry my webcam
messed up we're talking about that I
that I will and then we were talking
about the part where we're thinking
about in the future and you said that we
didn't want to seek reassurance about
our thoughts because we'd be fighting
against that and create more thoughts
but how do I fix my assumption about
like for example when we were talking
about all of this I was thinking about a
situation about me thinking that my
roommate doesn't like me as much as the
other roommates and if I don't get
reassurance that my roommate likes me as
much which i think is probably true I'm
just being very anxious about it how do
I fix the anxiety if I don't get
reassurance about it so let me ask you
something when you get reassurance about
it
what does it do to your anxiety oh my
god my web comes messing up the when I
get reassurance about it logically it
would help my anxiety because if she
says that's not what I'm asking you I'm
asking you what does it do to your
anxiety what it does to my anxiety is it
probably creates more thoughts no I'm
asking you so when so you know you're
concerned that your roommate doesn't
like you yeah have you sought
reassurance about this in the past no
this is just a thing that came up today
so that's why I was relating about it
when you okay have you been anxious
about something before yes and what when
someone reassures you what does that do
to your anxiety
it depends on the situation I guess in a
lot of cases my anxiety doesn't believe
them and then I think about reasons why
there may be to be telling me this to
make me feel better
and yeah it's a big thought loop yep I
guess it depends on the situation as
well I don't think that's the universal
thing across anxiety so give me an
example of where reassurance helps you
like in this room a kiss I feel like
that would help not one that could
happen like when that has happened maybe
me going to a lecturer talking about a
grade and saying I'm not I I'm anxious
about this exam because I don't think
I'm prepared enough and I talked to the
lecture and the lecture then explains to
me about how according to him I had been
prepared and then talks to me through
all of that and that maybe helps me has
that helped you in the past yes okay
so I think that that is different
because what that so I know this sounds
crazy but when we say reassurance I want
you to understand that reassurance is
not what the outside world gives you
because in both cases you're saying that
someone from the outside tries to
reassure you right yeah someone says
okay you're gonna do fine on the test
and someone else says okay you're
actually a really smart person even
though the signals from the outside are
exactly the same in one case it fuels
your anxiety and in another case it
doesn't feel your anxiety yeah does that
make sense so the first thing that we
need to understand is that that has
nothing to do with the outside because
if the outside is giving us the same
thing and our response is differential
oh that makes that it's not coming from
the outside it's coming from here that
makes a lot of sense right so then the
question is what is different in here
and I think in some cases what's
different is the way that your mind is
okay
this makes sense cuz it's it can be like
your confidence that is different as
well because if I'm not confident like
if inside maybe I do think I'm smart I
do think I do well in a test and I am
more confident about that then when I
hear the reassurance it will help me
confirm maybe my own thoughts that I was
like confirm my confidence but then when
other situations maybe if I'm internally
not confident and my ego is gonna be
damaged maybe if a girl doesn't like me
or something then it
well it won't actually help because my
ego will be fighting against it so I
think that that's possible so what I
would encourage you to do Felipe is to
examine this the main thing so remember
we're not talking about I mean we're
talking about individual situations as
examples to understand principles all
right now we're talking about today is
not solving for the equation of a
particular line we're trying to figure
out y equals MX plus B we're trying to
figure out one of the variables and I'm
telling you that if two people in
separate situations give you reassurance
and then one that helps your anxiety and
in another it doesn't help your anxiety
it doesn't have anything to do with the
outside it has to do with the inset okay
the next thing is is I want you to and I
want you to think about remember that
there are two problem-solving routes
right one is anxiety what's the other
one I mean I sort of said it but do you
remember the two diagrams well the the
oh yeah once the problem solving so it
goes from the like you have the problem
and you have a solution and then there's
anxiety thought loop right so the
question is when you sit down with a
professor which mode of operation does
your mind move into okay I'm going to
the problem solving so you have to tell
me
don't hypothesize yeah any logic go and
study it I guess I think what your
professor does is walks you through the
problem-solving group loca which then
relaxes the mind okay great question
okay
no a thank you so much all right let's
see if we've got rain I'm gonna give you
the boot okay fully bad how are you by
Raymond no one no sorry buddy okay we're
gonna invite a couple more people I know
you guys say one person at a time but
like because of these technical
difficulties can you hear me yep who is
that
this is one okay I'm gonna invite Reece
someone else and Victor just why we've
got one on the question go ahead one
okay so my question is kind of big can a
philosophical but I feel like this
affects my anxiety my motivation pretty
much everything about myself how do I
deal with
pessimism and like challenging like big
worldviews like so I'm a little nervous
like a like biological determinism like
being afraid that like I'm capable of
change okay so so once again I'm not
gonna answer the content of your
question because like you said that's a
big question and instead what I'm gonna
do is we're gonna look at the mechanism
of your question yeah okay so let's
start by a second okay let's let's try
to examine your thoughts so tell me a
little bit more about what what is that
I don't understand what you mean what
did you understand like what you say
like I have you know this philosophical
something rather can you say can you say
that again I don't know what that means
so what what I mean by pessimism that I
am incapable of change and incapable of
overcome anxiety I am incapable of
change right so let's think about what
is the tense of your statement aspirin
is incorrect hmm oh I suppose yeah I
suppose I'm incapable changed in the
teacher exactly right so now we have to
be tricky we have to be careful because
the mind is tricky and just because
you're using a verb in the present tense
does not mean that this is in the
present tense right are you saying
sitting there and you're saying that I
am incapable of change that's not what
you're saying what you're really I think
what this really is is I'm afraid I'm
never going to
change yeah what do you think is that
what that's correct because because
here's the thing like I I know this is
gonna sound I know this is gonna sound
crazy but so sometimes you know I I work
with patients with cancer really
fascinating in terms of like
understanding the mind so I'm going to
die how do you think this person feels
once when a terminal cancer patient
understands that they're going to die
how do you think they feel um I guess it
depends on how they feel about death
right mm-hmm
so they could be accepting they could be
scared
sure so so I know this is gonna sound
crazy but what is the tense of this
statement future incorrect dammit I know
it sounds bizarre but it's not it like
it's not it's because this looks like a
future statement right so I just I need
to explain a little bit so sometimes I
talk to a cancer patient who recognizes
and accepts that death is inevitable for
that and bizarrely when they recognize
that truth that is a truth that comes
from the present it's not actually like
a fear of the future it's not even in
the future it's like an acceptance in
the now that death is inevitable does
that make sense yeah and bizarrely that
this leads to peace it's bizarre it's
the weirdest thing but when someone
accepts in the present that's something
that some action is inevitable they
actually like relax because it's that
boat has sailed
you can lament it you can grieve so
they're gonna grieve they're gonna be
sad they're gonna be filled with lament
maybe some amount of regret but
underneath it all there's still peace
who is bizarre yeah okay so so that's I
mean that's sort of a random aside I
just I don't know exactly I mean
hopefully that was helpful for people I
felt like that was
I'm not exactly sure why so let's go
back to this okay so now you tell me and
it's it's is it one yes great okay so
one so when you say like what do we do
about this you tell me like what there
what are our solutions right so like you
say like I'm never gonna change you also
said some other stuff about the planet
right
yeah like well I mean I believe that the
universe is biologically determined ok
biological determinism fine what else
what other kind of pessimistic thoughts
you have I mean I think it all really
stems from there okay sure so oh you
know what in the purpose for the purpose
of this seminar you know what we're
gonna do is we're gonna take this and we
don't actually care about that we don't
care about that either what are you
gonna do so what do you what do you do
about fear
sure in general like how should you
approach this problem right because you
get that if I start talking to you about
biological determinism this is gonna be
intellectual masturbation for an hour
and you're not gonna get anywhere yeah
does that make sense cuz you've done it
before does that make sense
right doing that exactly so that's not
where your answer lies and this is
bizarre because like I said in
psychiatry we focus on the content of
the mind and in general we think that
solutions are external and like
content-based like I don't know how else
to say that like it's a kind of a weird
segment I don't even know how many
people are going to understand it but
like we think that the solution to you
know climate change is in the outside
world which obviously it is but also
like anxiety about climate change can
somewhat come from the outside world but
also like I want you to think about this
if you're worried about climate change
you know you can act like I can go
outside and plant a tree every day but
that person is not living in the future
that person is living in the present
they're addressing the problem of
climate change even though they don't
know if it's going to work they don't
know if it's enough or the corporations
will screw them or whatever they're
going out every day and they're planting
a tree they're doing their part there's
immense peace and that and there is
immense problem-solving about does that
make sense
yeah totally what am i doing now exactly
so that is what I'm saying is that
irrespective of what the problem is you
know it's not that a particular solution
because someone can be worried about
climate change and they can be worried
about corporate pollution so they can be
worried about cruise ships or you know
insufficient like carbon like moving to
renewable energy or like you know
hitting a tipping point of greenhouse
gases or like you know sea levels rising
or like all kinds of stuff you could be
photos or all that crap
all that crap can be anxiety provoking
you can also get data that's reassuring
and those people saying that those
people's anxieties will still remain do
you see that like it's just what Felipe
was saying about the external world can
give you reassurance and you can just
say screw that reassurance I'm not
interested so I'm asking you where does
your solution lie yeah incorrect dealing
with that fear is wrong hmm right that
fear is this do you understand that that
fear is a specific fear it's actually
incorrect sorry to say so I'm being a
little bit blunt with you by the way
sure right so we're sir where's our
solution man what have we been focusing
on what words Oh being the present yes
right so in the present so when you
worry about biological determinism what
are you worried about
like his determinism is about the past
present or future the future absolutely
and then the other thing is I write you
feel like I'm incapable so I think what
you need to work on is AI and being in
the present because determinism is like
I'm gonna be screwed down the road like
there's nothing I can do about it fine
so then why don't you gonna do today
like forget about the future what are
you gonna do today one
try to make changes what are you going
to change today what I think about where
is a kink in the present how do you do
that I'm asking you literally what are
you going to do today so what part of
the world are you in Washington
okay so you're in Washington so it's
like what like 8:30 in the morning for
you yep
so what are you going to do after the
webinar ends okay and after meditation
what are you gonna do I was gonna rather
to-do list okay and then after that what
are you gonna do are you gonna study or
not study okay so what about biological
determinism what is biologic like what
is biological determinism have to do
about anything that you just said well I
think it has everything to do with it
why I mean because there are certain
factors in my life based on past
experiences that bring me to carry out
these actions I disagree so you're
telling me that you're gonna meditate
like yeah I don't I don't see how
biological determinism has anything to
do with meditation I don't see how
do with writing a task list and I don't
think I don't see how biological
determinism has anything to do with
actually sitting down and cracking a
textbook in a sense obviously it does
because when you study you're gonna have
a particular IQ and depending on your IQ
and depending on X Y Z and depending on
ABC the results
your study studying will be different
and if you want to say that biological
determinism has something to do with the
results of your actions by all means if
I say that I'm gonna jump if I'm gonna
stand up and jump up and down after I'm
done with this webinar biological
determinism determines how high I jump
but it has nothing to do with whether I
jump or whether I don't drive does that
make sense yeah makes sense but I feel I
feel differently I understand that so
you need to start trying it this way and
see what happens because I don't think
that biological determinism has anything
to do with making a to-do list that just
feels so far-fetched to me
okay let's actually let's do this okay
let's see so we're gonna do a poll does
my illogical determinism have anything
to do with making a to-do list let's
find out now I think the real question
here is how hard am I about to get
trolled alrighty so I I know you feel
that way I'm not telling you to feel a
different way what I'm telling you to do
is collect data yeah so don't I can't
thank you through to this solution I
want you to just stop and just like do
the things that you are saying you're
gonna do in the moment so meditate make
a to-do list and crack open a textbook
or whatever you have to do study take
those three actions and do that a couple
more times a couple more times a couple
more times and are you incapable of
change I have no [ __ ] idea
maybe you're gonna change maybe you
won't I don't think that change is
actually thing change is impossible
change is literally a a fiction of the
mind that is philosophy to which we can
intellectual
masturbate about but I want you to do
these things and I think that your
answer still remains here in here and as
long as you're working over here like
nothing is gonna happen yeah if you
start acting because action happens in
the present if you start predicting the
consequences of your actions that's file
logical determinism whether I jump or
not is not biological determinism how
high I jump is biological determinism
those are two entirely different things
but action happens in the present
consequences of action happens in the
future it's a really really difficult
concept because it's so simple in the
mind does not like it the other thing is
you know you say that I am incapable so
like where do you get your sense of I
and I would guess that it comes from
your mind instead of like other kinds of
experiences so there's the other thing
is all we can think about confidence and
stuff like that if you wake up and you
focus on the action day after day you
check things off your to-do list
generally speaking your feeling about
yourself would change and that we sort
of but you can't understand that until
you do it so focused on what you're
gonna do after the webinar and good luck
buddy giving you the boot okay sure
thanks all right one more question and I
invited some people why haven't they
shown up okay we're gonna do Vlad Iman
Bonnie and Max and Raymond body were
giving you the boot too unless you can
speak now speak now or forever hold your
peace
yeah I mean I just read some comments
I'm not trying to be I'm not trying to
be hey I mean I realize I come across as
arrogant but it's really a pressure of
time right so you guys watch twitch
streaming and like I have time with
people to walk them through things into
extreme right so like here I'm a little
bit more of a you know I'm like no
that's incorrect because we don't have
time to walk you through it right let's
just get to the right answer so I
apologize if I'm hurting anyone's
feelings it's really not my intended I
wish I had you know another hour to
explain I mean that's why I love that's
why we started with twitch streaming so
we can have like an hour to take someone
like Juan and talk him through his ideas
of biological determinism and the
present and stuff like that yeah we're
still streaming in a couple of hours
okay I don't know why we can't get
anyone else okay
Oh max has joined the room beautiful max
Raymond has left the room
[Music]
what is the consensus behind determinism
I have no idea yeah III we're gonna do
thermo I'm trying to decide between
talking about procrastination Dharma
meditation or dealing with covin in
isolation and how to talk to people who
you're isolated with it's tricky ok
let's do that let's do Paul while we're
waiting I invited it like a bunch of
people max are you dzifa dar Viktor Sam
we're gonna get one more question
let's pull you here me yep what's your
question buddy uh thanks for doing this
man I've been watching all your stuff
for probably a few months now and I love
it and I thank you for the yoga this
morning too um so I used to be in the
military and I got out in 2017 mm-hmm
and I'm currently a student but I feel
like I'm really struggling with the
identity portion and it's it's kind of
like preventing me from being present at
all times and I also have like a lot of
anxiety about because I'm trying to
career change um I haven't I just have a
like a mountain of like things that are
causing anxiety like I'm not gonna be
able to pass college or I'm not gonna be
able to like right now I I'm fearing
that I'm gonna fail this class or like
and the next one's gonna be like I'm a
I'm applying to jobs and everybody's you
know nobody's hiring me um so am I gonna
have my next career so it's just like it
can be really hard to like be present
when you when you're having all those
thoughts sure and I want to know like
can I Center in on like a new identity
for myself because I I was from 18 to 32
now I was 30 years old I was always a
military guy and that was my
was my identity and now my my kind of
world is like completely dissolved kind
of yeah so you know max I think my
answer may be a little bit unsatisfying
to you but I'll do the best that I can
in the time that we have left okay so
the first thing is that you know I think
so this is why this is exactly why I
structured this talk on anxiety in this
way because here's the the basic problem
is that when you look at your anxiety
you say I'm worried about X Y Z I'm
worried about ABC I'm worried about de f
other people are worried about GHI
people are worried about all kinds of
things you're worried about are you
gonna be able to find a job are you
gonna be able to like land in this new
world with this new identity you know
those are all of the questions that you
have and the reason that I think that
talking about the process of how anxiety
works is because the content actually
doesn't matter because if you can learn
how to be in the present and you can
focus on on dissolving your ego which we
can talk more about then it doesn't
matter what's on the other side of the
equation it doesn't matter what you're
actually anxious about because you can
literally learn how to turn off your
anxiety and like function on that day
and I think that's ultimately what you
have to do because the other thing to
think about is that you don't have the
capability and I know this sounds
bizarre you don't have the capability of
actually determining whether you're
gonna be successful in the world or not
what do you think about that um yeah I
feel like that's probably true so tell
me what you are what is yours to control
and what is not yours to control my
actions I can control my actions and
what can you not control
the results of those actions okay so
you're afraid that you're not going to
be able to make the transition to a
civilian right yeah and have a second
career and have a second career can you
control whether you have a second career
or not no how does that make you feel
um well I really value the ability you
know I love working I loved working in
the military and I really I guess I
wouldn't I feel like it would be not
living up to potential type of deal if I
didn't get another job or a career sure
right so I want you to notice those are
that so there therein lies the problem
so there's a part of you that worries
about living up to your potential so
I'll tell you another thing potential is
false it's a false concept of the mind
so I want you guys to think about this
for a second okay
so what exists and that's the kind of
weird question what exists yes or I
don't know our present mind and body
absolutely perfectly correct so
potential is not a real thing right the
only thing that exists is reality
in reality is now regular right now if I
were to ask you like if I were to take a
measurement anywhere in the world of
anything that measurement could only be
taken in the present does that make
sense the only thing that we can measure
is this this world this moment this
reality and and so you you're getting
caught up about the future and you're
worried about not living up to your
potential where it's like you actually
have no control over what your potential
is potential is a falsity the only thing
that exists is what is right right so
like it when it
like become having a successful career I
hate to break it to you buddy that is
not that is not your choice and that is
not something you can control what you
can control is like going back to school
so you said you're a student right yes
so that I think is wonderful right
because you're actually huh um being
online though it's very hard to be have
that identity though it's like for me I
have to be around people that share the
same you know mind set and like goals so
I was thinking about this yesterday's
like maybe I just need to force myself
to get on campus more even though I'm
I'm pretty much 100% oh I am now because
of coronavirus but I'm always a hundred
percent online but I I mean yeah I
wouldn't right down the road from the
campus so so I want you to just notice
the tense of that statement right so you
say like I need to be around people who
like share a common goal with me yeah
that's not about future or present I
mean or past it's about present that's
just an attribute of who you are that is
part of your identity your identity is
not military or student your identity is
like human being who enjoys sharing in
goals with other human beings yes India
like that's true yeah and so as long as
you're not living in alignment to that
you're gonna feel like you don't even
have an identity it's not that you don't
have an identity it's that you're not
aligned with who you are yes and as long
as you're not doing something that's
aligned with who you are like if you're
an artist and someone sticks you in an
accounting firm you're gonna feel like
you don't know what your identity is
even though you know what your identity
is you're just not aligned with it so I
think you need to live a life that is
aligned with who you are and I think you
know more about who you are than you
realize and who you are is not
determined by your profession it does
it's not determined by your career
career is just like something that you
slap on your resume and it's a way that
hopefully money gets into your bank
account right so like there's a
difference between being a graphic
designer and like being someone who
creates things that are cool to look at
like one is a job and one
like who you are so in my case like I'm
someone who talks with people and tries
to help them that's who I am you guys
can call it whatever you want you I
could have been a priest I could have
been a psychiatrist I could have been
whatever doesn't matter
like am i a psychiatrist right now not
really no you're talking to me yeah
that's who I am
and who are you right now yeah I'm
realizing that I just need to align with
who are you right now I'm talking to you
right now yeah that's it that's all you
are
Yeah right so what I see is someone who
wants to be a better person someone who
wants to understand themselves and
someone who wants to live a life that is
like aligned with who they are that your
move your striving towards growth your
striving towards in a bizarre way being
who you are which is sort of growth but
is also not growth and that's where we
get into like Zen paradoxes and that you
also have noticed a couple of things
that like you need to be around other
people and I'm sure there are all kinds
of reasonable reasons why you're a sense
of identities under assault because
you're an undergrad yes you're a 30 year
old in undergrad yeah
that's not easy no you will be surprised
by how amazing it is once you get used
to it yes I have noticed I've become a
better student in the last two years but
yeah and then you will you'll begin to
realize that you have advantages over
these children Yeah right like you'll
realize they're kids like they actually
haven't like lived life yet and you've
really come of life and and try to take
some comfort in that but I think overall
it still comes down to you know taking
actions in the present it sounds like
you've figured out kind of who you are
and I think your sense of identity this
is the thing your sense of identity once
again is like the content side of things
we don't need to address that you just
need to start going to campus and
hanging out with people and things like
that and your sense of identity will
become like less important it's bizarre
your anxieties will just like literally
like start to melt away it's the
weirdest thing in the world
when I work with people in this way
they're like yeah it just doesn't bother
like people with anxiety for 15 years
will be like and I'll check in with them
because we'll talk about spirituality
and meditation stuff and then I'm like
by the way how's your anxiety are you
still worried about X Y Z and they're
like it just doesn't bother me as much
yeah it's weird
you were what so when you start to focus
on the ego and you start to focus on the
present you literally remove food and
drink in sustenance for your anxiety you
don't fix your anxiety that's what's so
[ __ ] confusing to everyone
everyone's like but what about my sense
of identity what about my sense of
biological determinism what about this X
Y Z what about people what about my nose
what about my hair what about my my
weight what about that and I'm like yeah
I don't really care
doesn't matter it's just all of that
stuff feeds your mind feeds off of the
thoughts of others and just think about
this for a second your anxiety is like
addictive does that make any sense to
you yeah well as various it comes in
cycles like you said like I I go into
cycles and it can be very dark like it
can get very dark and your mind even
though you suffer your mind loves to be
in that place yes it's like a kid in a
candy store it's like thoughts thoughts
thoughts lot thoughts and think about
what is the mind hate the mind hates no
thoughts and this is why boredom is so
hard for us we hate the mind the thing
that hates that we hate the most and the
mind hates the most is boredom because
boredom is a place with no stimulation
and with no stimulation thoughts are
hard to come up with and then the mind
starts to die if it has no thoughts so
when you're bored your mind starts to
wander it grasps like I want you guys to
really think about this for a second
when you're bored your mind is like a
starving something and it's gasping for
air it's thinking this thought that's
thinking that thought anything to like
get the chain of thoughts flow does that
make sense yeah and anything to like
start feeding itself because once it
gets interested in something then you
can think think think think think and
you're no longer bored and then the mind
is at ease because it's like oh thank
god we're thinking again
so is you step away from the process of
thinking it can be kind of difficult but
over time your anxiety won't have food
and water and it'll start to wither away
and then eventually it'll die and then
as you think anxious thoughts as you
engage in the world that's gonna add
food and water so this is why I like
conquering anxiety takes like really
like months or even years and then yeah
so good luck man thank you thanks for
you guys we're gonna have to stop
because we're actually like about 45
minutes overtime and I'll do a better
job of time management and meditation
next time okay
good luck Thanks